In this question, we are discussing navigation through Dom.
The category of this question is, of course, domain web and there will be six related questions we
are going to discuss.
We have already discussed what is Dom and how the DOM tree is in window and document object.
Related questions are even in event bubbling though we also had a window object as a top element in
that figure.
But here we have to concentrate on everything below the document object as we are discussing navigation
or traversal through the DOM tree.
So the document object will be the entry point.
Let's create a program and then we also see the same code as a DOM tree.
This is the output of the code which I'm going to show you in a moment.
We have two divisions, the first and second Division.
Inside the first Division, we have an unordered list inside which we have to analyze, whereas in second
division we have an input and a command button.
Let's check the code.
Now, it is the very same thing.
The only thing is I have given an idea to the first division that is the one which we will use in future.
And also I have configured a function on click event of the button where we can try a few statements.
So discord, if we imagine as a DOM tree, this is how it looks below the document, we see that the
DML is the main element inside which we have the head and the body.
They are at the same level inside the body.
We have division and also the script.
So this is how the Dom tree looks.
And inside each division you see that there are actions and allies and inputs and buttons.
So this is what a dom tree would look for the same code.
Now let's talk about few terminologies used.
While we want to navigate through the DOM here on the button click.
I will simply try.
First of all, console dart log document, dart document element.
Now this is one of the property which actually refers to the top element in the document object and
that is the DML.
So if I just save and try to see the output, I will open the developer tool here so we can see the
console will refresh the screen and click on the button to see that what exactly this document element
shows.
Now you see that it displays the content of HDMI right from the beginning of HDMI till the end.
So this means the document element property can refer to the topmost node in the DOM tree below the
document.
Remember now we can try one more property with document and that is the body.
I can say body or even document art head.
We can do this.
Rather I should keep this head before body and we try to see what exactly it shows.
Refreshing the screen and clicking the button.
So now you see that while you see Document Art Head, it does display all the content of how to behave
and also the body.
The entire content of the body is displayed.
So whenever you try to access any node, you do have body, head and various other ways to do it.
But when it comes to navigation, you need to look through all the elements, or I should say all the
nodes, because the tree which you see has various nodes, each is linked with parent and child relationship.
So here that is a property called Dot Child Nodes.
So let's begin with this.
Now I'll just remove these two and now we try to see what exactly displays when you say body dot child
nodes, as you see that it displays seven child nodes.
In fact, I can also get the count of it.
Let me also add one more statement here.
I'll say child nodes, dot length, that will just show me the number of elements, rather number of
nodes we have in the body.
So here it is.
There are seven.
Right.
And also it does display various nodes here.
Now, the question is, do we really see that there are seven nodes or not?
Or rather, I would say, where is this text node?
Yes.
Then there is a division.
But again, that is a text.
Then we have a division.
We have a text.
So the text which we see in between has no relevance in the output.
Why is it so?
The reason is that every tab, every new line, every whitespace you have in the HTML find.
Right now we have it.
You see this after the head we have an end to.
That's why this is on the new line.
Let's remove this new line after this body beginning.
I just save this because the first node we see here is the text node, and that is because there was
a new line here.
Right?
Now I will refresh and click.
Now you see that there are only six that is six nodes.
So every time you have an and turkey, maybe a whitespace or tab that will also be treated as a text
node and that is displayed here.
So don't worry about it just in case.
Insert of all the nodes, let's say you want only those nodes which are HTML elements, then you can
simply say children.
Then you will get the reference of the children.
That is all edge HTML that is regular elements here.
Let's do this refreshing and clicking.
Now you see you have division, you have scraped all such things, but there is no such normal text.
So this is a better way in case if you just want to deal with all the element nodes.
Also, the way we tried the script tag and we tried to display the body here.
What if I tried to display body in the head section?
Let's also have a look at it.
I'll put a script tag here, which is a valid tag because generally we see that people do use head tag.
Also, I'll say console.log.
The first thing I want to displays document are body.
Okay.
Refreshing.
And click here.
In fact, the moment I refresh, you see that there is a null display because that console anyway,
we did not put on any event, it was in the header section.
So it does display null.
Why is it so?
Because when the page is loaded in this section we have return body.
And at this point of time there is nothing added to the body.
So that's why it returns null.
NULL means there is nothing in the body as yet.
So these were few properties related to child nodes and document object itself.
But if you want to navigate through the tree, you must have some way to loop through the last node
of the tree.
And for the same thing, the document has several properties.
You can navigate upward, downward, even sideways, using various types of properties.
Let's first of all try one very important property, GA child nodes, and we are going to put a loop
which will help us to go through all the children.
Remember, when I say children of body, that means the child which is inside division is actually not
a direct child of the document.
So now I will remove this script which is not needed, and we are going to put a loop until the child
nodes length.
We are going to look through.
So I'll have a for loop here.
I'm being when I say led I is equal to zero.
I less then document art body not child node start length then A-plus plus.
And what we want to displays console.log document dart body dart child nodes because it's an array like
object, which we saw earlier when we try to display all child nodes.
Right.
So this will also display the text division you well, whatever you have inside your body directly.
In our case that is no UDL as a direct children to the body.
Let's run this.
So now you see that each and every node, whether it's a text node or a division or script even, right,
everything is part of the body and that we have loop through.
As I also mentioned, children is something which can allow you to access only the regular elements.
JavaScript also has various other properties which we are going to try.
Now, right now we have tried all these methods with body, but we can try all these methods for this
division also.
And that's the reason why I have already taken an idea of division.
So let's do that.
I will just get the reference of division all the time.
I'll select or rather const this one.
This is the reference of Division one and I will say document dot get element by ID and this one.
So now we have the reference.
Imagine that instead of document out body.
I just want to give this one.
That's it.
So now this will give you all the details of division, all child nodes of this one.
Let's save this and try it.
So now what do we have in this one?
We have the enter, that is the text nor we have each one.
Again, that is a new lines.
So text.
Then we have a UL and then we have text.
Now see, this ally is not a direct children of de one.
Right?
It is actually called as a descendant because it is a grandchild.
So we call this as a direct child, whereas this is the descendant.
So any level of children we may have in a dormitory, but when you say child knows, it's going to give
you list of the direct children only to access the children.
We do also have other properties.
Let's try two properties here first child and last child and see what happens.
Now we are going to try with this only rather than using the document our body we go with the.
So here I'll say console.log.
They want our first child now.
Which is the first child.
That's the question.
The first child will be the text nought because there is an enter.
That is a new line here.
Right.
So if I run this.
It's going to tell me the text.
You can explore this text to know that what does it contain?
And as you can see that it contains only the new line character.
So white spaces, right?
All such things are actually the text nodes added in the DOM tree.
But we don't want that.
Let's say we want a proper element.
Not every nor do we want to have as an output.
Then we do also have first element child property.
You would generally see that if there is a first child, then that is also first element child.
If there is a lost child, you will see that last element change.
So this element, when you add is going to return the proper element, not any other text.
No.
Right.
Let's do this.
Now if you click, you see the first proper element, right?
Regular element we have in the day one is each one.
So that is a return.
Similarly, the way we have force chain, we do also have last mile and last element chain.
So to access the children, to access the child, you have first child, first element child, last
child and last element child properties of any DOM tree.
Nor even with these elements you have a property called node name, right?
If you say in your name it will return the node name of it.
Let's run this and see how does it work.
It is at home.
There is also a property called Node type which returns type of Nord.
There are various types which I will just list out in a moment.
Sugiura turns one.
There is a table which I will show at the end in the related questions where you will get the idea what
are the different node types we have?
But it does return the node type.
So any element you access, like first child or first element child or even last child, you have node
name, node type and various other properties which you can refer.
These are actually properties which allow you to access the children the way we have used children property
which allow you to access the child nodes by various means.
You do have sibling related properties.
Let's see with this one.
I just want to say, which is the next sibling of this one.
So here we have given the next sibling, which is the same level element that will be the sibling of
Division one.
So this division is the sibling of this, and that's the next sibling.
So if you run this, you should get this one, but you are not getting it here.
The reason is, again, after the this one, that is a new line.
That is a text node, which is, again, a sibling of it.
So now you do have the same thing here.
Next element, sibling, which will return a proper element.
So now if I click here, we have the division.
It doesn't return the text node.
So for accessing siblings, we have next element sibling.
Previous sibling and previous element sibling also.
And to access the parent nodes, we do have properties like parent node or parent element.
For example, for this I just want to have which is the pattern node offered.
A node can be anything but the element will be a proper element.
So we do also have parent element as well.
Now in our case, it might be the same.
So let's just save this and see the output.
Right.
So this is the pattern node and this is the pattern element that is the body.
So we have seen that there are various ways to access children's siblings, our parents.
In the related questions, we'll still discuss few more possibilities while navigation.
By looking at this figure, I would like to explain a few terminologies here.
Like these two divisions here.
Document is the pattern of all these elements.
Now Division is a child.
So you will see that these two divisions are children of the body.
Now, these two divisions are also sibling.
That is, they are at the same level.
Like, for example, this H1 and UL is a sibling that is a next sibling like this or a previous sibling
like this.
Even in Division two, we have H1 input and button.
They all are sibling.
So the button is a next sibling of this input and each one is a previous sibling of input.
Let's discuss the related questions of this topic.
The first question is what is a node in DOM tree?
And explain the different types of nodes.
So following are the most important node types, each element, and also the text node which we have
seen.
Everything is actually a node in a DOM tree, but not every node is an element as well.
Right.
That is a text node or there is an element, an HTML element.
These are the different node types.
So when we try to display node type in one of the case, we received one.
And the reason is that was the element node.
That's why it was showing one.
Next question.
How can you access next same level element for a given node element?
We have already seen that if we want to access the same level element, we have next element, sibling
or next sibling.
But here we want to access just the element.
That's why we say next element sibling, which will allow us to access the same level node element.
The third question is what is the difference between child nodes and children property?
So child nodes actually returns all the nodes, whether it is a text or a regular element that is children
returns only those which are regular HTML elements.
That is the difference.
Fourth question how can you check whether an element has a child node or not?
So now we do use child nodes dot length also.
But we have a matter.
Carl has child nodes.
This matter allows us to check whether the element has nodes or not.
Fifth question is what is the purpose of dumb navigation or travel is a see the basic idea of traversal
or navigation is v have access programmatically to all the nodes which we see in the HTML page.
Let's say that you want to remove a specific node, or let's say you want to search through the document
and you want to modify content or maybe some formatting of a node.
In such case, you want to go through the node, you would want to traverse through the node.
In such case.
Dom Navigation and these type of properties and matters are useful we have not seen yet.
How do we add or remove element that will be covered in few of the next questions?
But at least you get idea that what is navigation and how do you go through every note if you want to,
in case let's say you want to search or delete an element.
Sixth question what will be the output of below given statement?
Now the statement is that you have an element.
For example, let's say in our case it was due once I can set new one dot last child, dot next sibling,
what will be the output of it?
So the output will always be null.
The reason is that if that is a last chain, it cannot have any more sibling.
So either you go next sibling or next element sibling.
It's not going to return anything.